arXiv:2602.18602v1 [cs.PL] 20 Feb 2026  Package Managers Ó la Carte

                                        A Formal Model of Dependency Resolution

                                        RYAN GIBB, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
                                        PATRICK FERRIS, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
                                        DAVID ALLSOPP, Jane Street, United Kingdom
                                        THOMAS GAZAGNAIRE, Tarides, France
                                        ANIL MADHAVAPEDDY, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom

                                        Package managers are legion. Every programming language and operating system has its own solution, each
                                        with subtly different semantics for dependency resolution. This fragmentation prevents multilingual projects
                                        from expressing precise dependencies across language ecosystems; it leaves external system and hardware
                                        dependencies implicit and unversioned; it obscures security vulnerabilities that lie in the full dependency
                                        graph. We present the Package Calculus, a formalism for dependency resolution that unifies the core semantics
                                        of diverse package managers. Through a series of formal reductions, we show how this core is expressive
                                        enough to model the diversity that real-world package managers employ in their dependency expression
                                        languages. By using the Package Calculus as the intermediate representation of dependencies, we enable
                                        translation between distinct package managers and resolution across ecosystems.

                                        1 Introduction

                                        Package managers are numerous and diverse, yet all fundamentally solve the same problem, while
                                        remaining ad hoc and non-interoperable. Consider a machine learning research project on Debian
                                        Linux, using a combination of C, Rust, and OCaml code for a static binary, with dynamic Python
                                        bindings that use GPU drivers, which in turn depend on a particular kernel driver. Four separate
                                        package managers are required to deploy this program: opam (OCaml), Cargo (Rust), pip (Python),
                                        and APT (Debian). If the program is to be portable beyond Debian, even more are required: APK
                                        for Alpine, DNF for Red Hat-based Linux. Dependencies between these ecosystems are managed
                                        ad hoc: they are typically unversioned, duplicated across ecosystems, and consequently invisible to
                                        security tooling. Yet all these package managers share a common core: they all take dependencies
                                        written in a domain-specific language (DSL) [16] and ultimately resolve them to output a filesystem
                                        subtree. In this paper, we offer not only a framework to understand and reason about package
                                        managers in their commonality and diversity, but also a lingua franca for translating between
                                        package managers' dependency languages to enable cross-ecosystem resolution.

                                           We make these contributions:

                                              Ę A survey of over thirty package managers across operating system and programming lan-
                                                 guage ecosystems, identifying a shared core of dependency relations, dependency resolution,
                                                 and deployment; and axes along which they diverge: conflicts, concurrent versions, peer
                                                 dependencies, features, package formulae, variable formulae, and virtual packages (¦2).

                                              Ę The Package Calculus, a minimal formal system which captures dependency resolution
                                                 in three conditions - root inclusion, dependency closure, and version uniqueness. We
                                                 show how the NP-completeness of dependency resolution can be avoided, but is ultimately
                                                 inherent in capturing the complexity of real-world package managers (¦3).

                                              Ę A model for each axis of variation in dependency expression as an extension to the core
                                                 calculus, with a sound and complete reduction from each extension back to the core (¦4).

                                        Authors' Contact Information: Ryan Gibb, ryan.gibb@cl.cam.ac.uk, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom; Patrick
                                        Ferris, patrick.ferris@cl.cam.ac.uk, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom; David Allsopp, dallsopp@janestreet.com,
                                        Jane Street, United Kingdom; Thomas Gazagnaire, thomas@tarides.com, Tarides, France; Anil Madhavapeddy, University of
                                        Cambridge, United Kingdom, anil.madhavapeddy@cam.ac.uk.
-                                                                                  Gibb et al.

      Ę A reduction of the cross-ecosystem translation problem from 2 to 2 translators, using the
         calculus as an intermediate representation for dependency expression, enabling dependency
         resolution across ecosystem boundaries. We show when the reductions compose and when
         they do not (¦5).

   Package management to date has not unified the semantics of different systems; existing interop-
erability efforts have focused on sharing solving mechanisms between ecosystems with the same
semantics (¦6). Instead of seeing package managers as monolithic and unrelated, we tease apart the
commonality and diversity to show how we can unify the semantics of dependency expression (¦7).

2 Defining Package Managers

Package managers evolved from simple tools for automating software installation and underwent a
Cambrian explosion in the mid-2000s as it became standard for every new operating system and
programming language to define its own solution (Appendix A). They use inconsistent terminology
and exhibit a variety of subtly different semantics to solve their domain-specific problems, but
share a common core. We identify the common characteristics of package management (¦2.1) and
define the axes in which diversity emerges (¦2.2).

2.1 Commonality

2.1.1 Dependency. Package managers express dependency relations from a depender package to
a dependee package, meaning the depender requires the dependee. Dependees, sometimes called
libraries, can be source code, a shared object, or data files. If a package is not a dependee, it might
be an `application' intended for use by an end-user. Packages are identified by a name and version,
and a depender can normally express a set of compatible versions of a dependee.

2.1.2 Resolution. We use dependency resolution to refer to the problem of computing, given a
package, the set of package names and versions that must be provided to satisfy its dependencies
transitively. A resolver performs dependency resolution. A resolution is the set of packages selected
by resolving dependencies.

2.1.3 Deployment. Given a resolution, package managers will typically provide the packages
through deployment. This is typically a filesystem subtree, though for embedded systems such as
BusyBox or Yocto Linux, it may be a firmware image. Source-based language package managers for
interpreted languages such as JavaScript might simply place source code into a local directory, as
npm does. System package managers that handle binary packages might unpack archives into the
file system hierarchy. Other package managers might build the software according to instructions in
the package metadata, as happens with Cargo, opam, or Cabal (Haskell). Haiku OS deploys packages
by mounting them in a union filesystem, allowing for layering and sharing of multiple packages.
Nix places built packages at a path containing a cryptographic hash of their store derivation in
the `Nix store'. Some ecosystems are primarily binary-based, while others are source-based. In
practice, many lie on a spectrum: Gentoo's binary package hosting allows users to substitute
pre-built binaries for source builds, and Nix treats binary deployment as a transparent optimisation
of source-based deployment via binary cache substitution. If a package manager is source-based, it
might employ sandboxing to ensure reproducibility and isolation while building packages, as opam
and Nix do.

2.2 Diversity
Table 1 compares a selection of package managers according to our classification.
                                Description                                                                                      Dependency Expression

   Package        Ecosystem     Repository   Toolchain1         Packaging                         Ver.    Conflicts  Concurrent  Peer    Features  Package    Virtual  Variable  Optional
   Manager           ¦2.2.1        ¦2.2.2       ¦2.2.3          Language                     Constraints    ¦2.2.6     Versions  Deps      ¦2.2.9  Formula   Packages  Formula     Deps
                                                                                                                         ¦2.2.7  ¦2.2.8             ¦2.2.10             ¦2.2.12   ¦2.2.13
CPAN            Perl            Rolling                            ¦2.2.4                        ¦2.2.5                                                       ¦2.2.11  
pkg_add         OpenBSD         Versioned                                                                                                                                        
CRAN            R               Versioned    P           cpanfile                            2                                                                                   
APT             Debian Linux    Versioned                                                                                                                                        
pacman          Arch Linux      Rolling      P           .tgz                                                                                                                    
Portage         Gentoo          Rolling                                                                                                                                          
DNF4            Red Hat Linux   Versioned    P           DESCRIPTION                                                                                                             
Nix [27]        Various         Versioned                                                                                                                                        
Gem             Ruby            Rolling      P           .deb control                                                                                                            
Maven5          Java            Rolling                                                                                                                                          
Cabal [8]       Haskell         Rolling      P           PKGBUILD (Bash)                                                                                                         
Zero Install    Cross-platform  Rolling                                                                                                                                          
APK             Alpine Linux    Versioned    P           ebuild (Bash)                                               3                                                           
TLmgr           TeX Live        Versioned                                                                                                                                        
pip7            Python          Rolling      P           .spec                                                                                                                   
Homebrew        macOS           Rolling                                                                                                                                          
npm             Javascript      Rolling      P           Nix expressions  .drv                                                                                                   
NuGet           .NET            Rolling                                                                                                                                          
Chocolatey      Windows         Rolling      P           Ruby                                                                                                                    
Composer        PHP             Rolling                                                                                                                                          
Conda           Python          Rolling      PB          pom.xml (XML)                       6                                                                                   
Guix [23]       Various         Rolling                                                                                                                                          
pkg11           FreeBSD         Versioned    PB          .cabal                                                                                                                  
opam [2]        OCaml           Rolling                                                                                                                                          
pkgman          Haiku OS        Versioned    P           feed.xml                                                                                                                
Pub             Dart            Rolling                                                                                                                                          
Spack [30]      HPC             Versioned    P           APKBUILD (Bash)                                                                                                         
Cargo [3]       Rust            Rolling                                                                                                                                          
Stack           Haskell         Versioned    P           tlpkg                                                                                                                   
Bazel           Multi-language  Rolling14                                                                                                                                        
Yarn            Javascript      Rolling      P           pyproject.toml                                                                                                          
Go modules [7]  Go              Rolling16                                                                                                                                        
Unison [20]     Unison          Rolling      P           Ruby                                                        8                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                             P           package.json                                                            

                                             PB          .csproj (XML)                       9                                   

                                             P           .nuspec (XML)                       10                                  

                                             P           composer.json                                                           

                                             P           meta.yaml                                                               

                                             P           Scheme                                                                  

                                             P           JSON manifest                                                           

                                             P 12        opam file                                                               

                                             P           .PackageInfo                                                            

                                             P           pubspec.yaml                                                            

                                             P           Python                                                                  

                                             PB          Cargo.toml                                                              

                                             PB          stack.yaml + .cabal                 13                                  

                                             P B 15      Starlark                            MVS                                 

                                             P           package.json                                                            

                                             P B C go.mod                                    MVS                                 

                                             P B C Unison                                                                        

                                                         Table 1. A comparison of representative package managers.

1 Whether a tool is a P ackage manager, B uild system, and/or a C ompiler. 2 CPAN clients install the latest version greedily without backtracking. 3 Limited support with `Slotting'. 4 DNF
replaced YUM as the standard package manager frontend for RPM-based distributions including Fedora and OpenSUSE. 5 Gradle also uses Maven repositories and POM dependency metadata.

6 Maven uses a "nearest wins" heuristic rather than constraint solving. 7 Poetry and uv use the same pyproject.toml format and dependency model. 8 By manual name mangling, and only done for
1% of packages. 9 NuGet defaults to lowest applicable version without backtracking. 10 Chocolatey uses NuGet's resolution infrastructure. 11 pkg (pkgng) replaced the earlier FreeBSD pkg_* tools.
12 Opam supports language-agnostic build scripts. 13 Stack uses curated Stackage snapshots rather than solving version constraints. 14 The Bazel Central Registry is a rolling registry introduced

with Bzlmod; its use is optional and the traditional WORKSPACE approach requires no repository. 15 Bazel is a build system with package management functionality. 16 The Go module proxy is a

rolling cache of modules fetched from source, rather than a traditional curated repository.
-  Gibb et al.

2.2.1 Ecosystems. The first section of Table 1 describes the particular use case for which a package
manager exists. As noted, package managers generally fall into two categories: language package
managers and system package managers. The intended use for language package managers is in
distributing libraries and tools to developers in a specific programming language, and system pack-
age managers in administering a full operating system. The lines between these often blur; system
package managers do distribute language libraries, and language package managers can facilitate
setting up a development environment with system dependencies. System package managers tend
to lag behind the latest versions of libraries as they maintain a coordinated, coherent package set
within the ecosystem, while language package managers prioritise freshness with less coordination.

2.2.2 Repositories. Almost all package managers group packages together in a centralised repos-
itory, allowing for discoverability of packages and curation of version constraints. For example,
Debian maintains a coherent set of versions of packages, and opam uses reverse dependency checks
on new releases of dependees to validate dependency version constraints. Some package managers
keep one main repository where changes are made continuously; a `rolling release'. Others peri-
odically release a version of their repository, representing a `versioned release' of their operating
system distribution. Security and other updates may be backported to previous releases of their
repository for some time, creating `minor' releases which should be safe for every user to deploy
without risking software incompatibilities. Multiple repositories can also often be combined, for
example, with non-free packages, or unofficial user-contributed packages. Go is a notable exception:
packages are identified by URL with no requirement for a central package repository, though Go
does maintain a central proxy for availability of modules.

2.2.3 Toolchain Integration. Some package managers, especially language package managers, have
some degree of integration with other parts of the toolchain: build systems and compilers. opam
includes build scripts in package metadata which can invoke a build system or compiler, but is
language-agnostic. This is similar to how a build system's rules will include invocations of a
compiler, such as a makefile target invoking gcc. Other ecosystems have tighter integration; Cargo
is the Rust ecosystem's package manager and build system. The Go tool is a package manager, build
system, and compiler. This enables functionality that might not be otherwise possible without a well-
defined API between these parts of the toolchain. For example, Cargo's concurrent version support
is enabled by using knowledge of package management to provide unique symbols using package
versions. The Unison language has eliminated dependency resolution by content-addressing all
definitions: each function is identified by a hash of its syntax tree, so dependencies are pinned to
exact hashes rather than version constraints.

   Some system package managers also manage configuration files: APT's dpkg tracks configuration
files and prompts users to merge, overwrite, or keep local modifications when a package upgrade
changes a shipped default. NixOS [28] takes this further by treating the entire operating system
configuration as a fixed point of composable modules, subsuming system configuration into the
package manager.

2.2.4 Packaging Language. Package managers express dependencies (¦2.1.1) in a variety of pack-
aging DSLs, normally as static data structures - e.g. TOML, .deb control files, or .opam files.
Sometimes the DSLs are expressions embedded in Turing-complete languages [34] - e.g. Home-
brew's (macOS) Ruby, Spack's (HPC) Python, or Portage's (Gentoo Linux) ebuild scripts - that can
be compiled to a static structure, as the Nix DSL compiles to store derivation .drv ATerm files. These
DSLs can support functionality such as variable assignment, boolean algebra, or parameterised
dependency relations. The DSLs store other metadata, such as build scripts, and are often provided
by a centralised repository (¦2.2.2).
Package Managers Ó la Carte  -

   The relationship between specification and tooling varies across ecosystems. Some have a formal
specification consumed by disparate tools: Python's dependency metadata has evolved through
setup.py, setup.cfg, and pyproject.toml, with multiple incompatible lockfile formats. Others
have a single reference implementation whose format other tools consume, such as opam's .opam
files used by the OCaml build system Dune, or Ruby's Gemfiles shared between Bundler and Gel.

2.2.5 Version Constraints. Dependency resolution relies on the version constraints of a depen-
dency (¦2.1.1). For example, a package depending on 1  a  3 might depend on a set containing a
with versions 1, 2, and 3. Some package managers, such as Nix, can only express a dependency on
a single version of a package name. Go's minimum version selection specifies only a minimum
version bound for each dependency, and has a linear-time dependency resolution algorithm (¦3.3).
In this column we characterise the expressivity of the package manager's version constraints.

2.2.6 Conflicts. Package managers can support packages expressing conflicts - a dependency
on the absence of a package. This can be used for forks of a project which are not co-installable.
Conflicts can be version-scoped, for example to allow conflicting only with versions below 2.0 of
a package. Portage distinguishes weak blocks (!pkg) from strong blocks (!!pkg): weak blocks are
non-binding preferences to the solver, analogous to Debian's Recommends (¦2.2.13), while strong
blocks enforce hard mutual exclusion.

2.2.7 Concurrent Versions. Many package managers allow only one version of a package name in
a resolution due to deployment constraints such as requiring unique symbols when linking objects,
or storing packages at a unique path in the filesystem. The OCaml compiler toolchain does not
support multiple versions of a package, but opam can manage multiple independent installations
called switches, each of which can contain different versions of the same package. System package
managers often put a package at a particular path in the filesystem, so multiple versions of the
same package would collide.

   Other package managers allow concurrent versions of the same package to exist in a resolution.
Cargo uses name mangling to support linking multiple versions of a single library into the same
binary, where typically only one version can be linked due to duplicate symbols. Cargo restricts this
to packages with different major versions under the semantic versioning scheme: co-linking minor
versions would create duplicate, incompatible types in the binary, while different major versions
are expected to have distinct APIs [4, 45]. Concurrent versions are therefore isolated - the types of
one major version cannot interoperate with another. Nix [27] diverges from the Linux Filesystem
Hierarchy Standard to place packages at paths containing unique cryptographic hashes, allowing
the installation of multiple versions of a package on the same system. npm allows duplication of
dependee packages by storing them in a subdirectory of their depender.

2.2.8 Peer Dependencies. Package managers which support concurrent versions can also support
peer dependencies. In npm, for example, a plugin such as a React component library declares a peer
dependency on react: it does not bundle its own copy, but instead requires that its parent also
depends on react with a compatible version. More generally, given a dependency from a parent
(depender) to a child (dependee), a peer dependency is a relation from the child to a peer package,
expressing that the parent must also depend on the peer. The peer version selected must satisfy
both the peer dependency version constraints and the parent's version constraints on the peer.

   npm supports peer dependencies, but their behaviour has changed multiple times. The
--legacy-peer-deps behaviour is that a peer dependee is only included when the parent also
depends on it. The contemporary behaviour is that peer dependees that are not marked as optional
are included regardless of the parent's dependencies.
-  Gibb et al.

2.2.9 Features. Cargo supports features of packages that are used to enable optional functionality
that may require additional dependencies. Dependency relations are parameterised by a set of
features, and features can also alter the dependencies of a package. The resolver unifies features, so
a package will be provided with the union of all features requested by its dependers. In the Python
world, dependency specifiers define `extras' which can similarly add dependencies. Portage's USE
flags serve the same role: a dependency can request USE flags with dev-libs/foo[bar], and USE
flags can trigger additional dependencies via bar? ( dev-libs/baz ). Like Spack's variants, USE
flags additionally allow a package to depend on the absence of a flag - dev-libs/foo[-bar] in
Portage, depends_on('foo', when='~bar') in Spack - combining features with conflicts (¦2.2.6).
Cargo features are only additive: a depender can require a feature but not block its presence.

   Ecosystems without native feature support sometimes encode features manually in
version strings. For example, opam's ocaml-option-* packages encode compiler options
such as ocaml-option-flambda and ocaml-option-afl as distinct packages, and the
ocaml-options-only-* packages (e.g. ocaml-options-only-flambda-fp) create a dis-
tinct package for each exclusive combination. This is structurally similar to the feature reduction
we will define in Definition 4.4.4, but without feature unification. Since each combination is a
separate version, version uniqueness (¦3.1) forces a single choice, and the number of versions
grows combinatorially with the number of options.

2.2.10 Package Formula. Some package managers support package formulae - boolean expres-
sions over package dependencies. For example, opam allows a package to declare that it re-
quires either lwt or async as a concurrency monad ("lwt" | "async"), or that it requires both
("lwt" & "async"). APT supports disjunction via the | operator in Depends fields, for example
Depends: libssl-dev | libgnutls-dev to accept either TLS implementation.

2.2.11 Virtual Packages. Closely related to package formulae are virtual packages. APT supports
virtual packages which allow multiple packages to provide the same functionality. Packages can
express dependencies on virtual packages that other packages `provide' [6]. For example, both
openssh-server and dropbear-bin provide the virtual package ssh-server.

2.2.12 Variable Formula. An extension of the package formula (¦2.2.10) is the variable formula.
Some package managers support global and local variables in package formulae (¦4.5). For example,
in opam, the global variable os-distribution makes a formula conditional on the operating
system the package manager is deploying the package on. In APT, dependencies can similarly be
parameterised by computer architecture. The opam package-local with-test denotes dependencies
that are only required when tests have been enabled for the package. Python's dependency groups
serve a similar role, having groups such as docs or test in pyproject.toml labelling sets of
dependencies that are conditional on the development task. Variables can also be used to distinguish
build-time from run-time dependencies. Instead of an explicit boolean formula, these can also be
implicit labels on dependencies, making them conditional on the platform or architecture.

2.2.13 Optional Dependencies. Package managers can support optional dependencies, which affect
the build plan rather than the resolution. An optional dependency from a depender to a dependee
means the depender will use the dependee if and only if it appears in the resolution; the resolver
does not attempt to include or exclude it. In opam, optional dependencies determine build ordering
and trigger rebuilds: if the optional dependee is installed, the depender is built after it and may
need rebuilding when it changes. Like features (¦2.2.9), optional dependencies can enable additional
functionality of a package, but are less expressive in that one cannot disable an optional dependency
if the optional dependee is in the resolution - their effect is resolution-wide rather than scoped to
individual dependencies.
Package Managers Ó la Carte  -

   This definition of optional dependencies is distinct from npm's optionalDependencies, which
have the same behaviour as Debian's Recommends. These are a way to request the resolver to
include them in the resolution, but not to return an error if this is not possible. As we are concerned

only with satisfiability of resolutions, we do not model this; an extension with solver preferences

could capture such best-effort behaviour.

3 Package Managers, Abstractly

We define a minimal formal system for dependency resolution in package management sys-
tems (¦3.1), extend it with version formulae (¦3.2), and show how the NP-completeness of resolution
can be avoided but is ultimately necessary (¦3.3).

3.1 The Package Calculus

We define the Package Calculus, hereafter referred to as the core calculus, according to the following
definitions.

   Definition 3.1.1 (Package). We define:

    (a)  as the set of possible package names.
    (b)  as the set of possible package versions.
    (c)  =  ū  as the set of possible packages as name-version pairs.
    (d)    as the set of packages which exist.

   Definition 3.1.2 (Dependency). We define dependencies    ū ( ū P ( )) as a relation from
packages to a name and set of versions. We denote an element of  (read as `depends on') with infix
notation as (, )(, ) where a package (, )   expresses a dependency on a package name
   and set of compatible versions    which can satisfy the dependency. Every package
referenced by  must be in ; that is, (, )(, ) = (, )    {(, ) |   }  .

   Definition 3.1.3 (Resolution). Given dependencies  and root   , a resolution    is valid
if the following conditions hold:

    (a) Root Inclusion:   
         The resolution contains the root.

    (b) Dependency Closure:    . (, ) =    . (, )  
         For every package in the resolution, each of its dependencies must be satisfied with a
         compatible version.

    (c) Version Uniqueness:  (, ), (, )  .  = 
         Only one version of a package name is in the resolution.

We write S(,  ) for the set of all resolutions of  in . We define the query    ū P ( ) as the
immediate dependencies of the root,  = {(, ) |  (, )}.

   Figure 1c illustrates dependencies as a directed hypergraph [17] - a generalisation of a directed
graph in which each edge connects a set of source vertices to a set of target vertices. Each dependency
is an edge from the depender (the domain) to a set of dependees. Formally, we define vertices 
and edges  = {({(, )}, {(, ) |   }) | (, )(, )}. Note that we restrict the domain to a
cardinality of one - we can only express a dependency from one package. The only valid resolution
for Figure 1b with query  = {(, {1})} is  = {, (, 1), (, 1), (, 1), (, 2)}.

   Theorem 3.1.4. DependencyResolution (Definition 3.1.3) is NP-complete.

Proof. See Appendix B.       
-                                                                              Gibb et al.

                                                                       A1

   Package: A                                                      B1      C1
   Depends: B (= 1), C (= 1)
                                    (, 1)(, {1})                           D3
   Package: B                       (, 1)(, {1})                           D2
   Depends: D (>= 1), D (<< 3)      (, 1)(, {1, 2})                        D1
                                    (, 1)(, {2, 3})        (c) Hypergraph illustration.
   Package: C
   Depends: D (>= 2)            (b) Dependency relation .

         (a) Debian syntax.

              Fig. 1. An instance of the Package Calculus.

3.2 Versions

We express a dependency on an abstract set of compatible versions (Definition 3.1.2), which is
normally expressed with a version formula - relational and logical expressions defining compatible
version sets. To support version formulae, package managers typically impose a non-lexicographical
total ordering of versions.

   Definition 3.2.1 (Version Ordering). A version ordering is a total order  on  (Definition 3.1.1.b).
For packages (, 1), (, 2)  , extend  to: (, 1)  (, 2)  1  2

   Definition 3.2.2 (Resolution Ordering). A resolution ordering is a partial order S on S(,  )
where for resolutions 1, 2  S(,  ), we say

                      1 S 2   (, 2)  2.  1   . (, 1)  1  1  2

   Maximal elements of S represent the `freshest' possible resolutions, but a maximum resolution
may not exist. For example, the query  = {(, {1})} in:

                       (, 1)(, {1, 2}) (, 1)(, {1, 2}) (, 2)(, {1})

Finding a valid resolution (Definition 3.1.3) does not depend on version ordering, but an algorithm
can prioritise higher versions (Definition C.5).

   Different ecosystems define different version orderings and formulae [5, 45]. The VERS speci-
fication [42] defines a universal version range notation, implemented by the univers library [10]
which wraps ecosystem-specific version comparison logic. We define the Version Formula Calculus
to be as expressive as the VERS specification according to the following definitions.

   Definition 3.2.3 (Version Formula). We define:                       

    (a)  as  in Definition 3.1.1.d.
    (b) A set of the versions of    that exist,  = { | (, )  }.
    (c) Version formulae :

                  ::=  |    |    |    ::=  | > |  | < | = | 

   (d) A total ordering  (Definition 3.2.1).
   (e) Semantics function Ę :   P ( ) for  under    :

    =                             = {   |   } for   {, >, , <}

   1  2 = 1  2 1  2 = 1  2

   =  = {}                        =  \ { }

   These version formulae can express common version constraints:
Package Managers Ó la Carte                      -

">1.0.0"                     : > 1.0.0

"^1.2.3" (semver-compatible) :  1.2.3  < 2.0.0

"!=1.4.*"                    : < 1.4.0   1.5.0

   Definition 3.2.4 (Version Formula Dependency). We define version formula dependencies

   ū ( ū ) where an element (, ) (, ) has formula  representing the set of compati-
ble versions.

   Definition 3.2.5 (Version Formula Resolution). Given dependencies  and root   , a
resolution    is valid if:

    (a) Root Inclusion:  as  and  as  in Definition 3.1.3.a.
    (b) Dependency Closure:    .  (, ) =    . (, )  
    (c) Version Uniqueness:  as  in Definition 3.1.3.c.

We write S (, ) for the set of all resolutions of  in .

   We reduce the Version Formula Calculus to the core calculus by evaluating each formula to its
version set.

   Definition 3.2.6 (Version Formula Reduction). Given , , and , we define a reduction to
the core calculus with , , and  as:

 (a) Packages:  :=  and  := 
 (b) Dependencies:  := {(, )(, ) | (, ) (, )}

Theorem 3.2.7 (Correctness).   S(,  )    S (, )

3.3 Resolution Complexity

Real-world package managers navigate the NP-completeness of DependencyResolution (Theo-
rem 3.1.4) in different ways, forming a spectrum from restricted-but-tractable resolution to full
NP-completeness. At the most restricted end, Go's minimum version selection (MVS) [25] achieves
deterministic, linear-time resolution. MVS relies on strict adherence to semantic versioning [45]:
minor and patch versions must be backwards-compatible, and only major version changes can
break APIs. Under this assumption, dependencies specify only a minimum version bound, since any
version above the minimum within the same major version is guaranteed to be compatible. Different
major versions are treated as different package names [24], allowing multiple major versions to
coexist in the same resolution. Rather than selecting the latest available version, MVS selects
the minimum version satisfying all bounds - the maximum of all minimum bounds. Since what
constitutes a breaking change is ambiguous in practice, selecting the minimum reduces exposure to
unintended breakage. Upgrades are an explicit developer action that rewrites the minimum bounds.

   Cargo also allows multiple versions of a package name to exist in a resolution, but it falls short
of linear-time resolution as its dependency formulae allow upper bounds within a major version,
because sometimes minor version bumps include breaking changes. Its dependency formulae can
also span semver-incompatible [45] version sets (e.g. ">=1, <3", ">=0.1, <0.5"), whereas you
can only depend on one major version of a Go module.

   At the other end, in ecosystems like OCaml, any API change is potentially breaking due to
features such as module inclusion, where a package's API is implicitly dependent on the APIs
of its dependees. There is no meaningful distinction between major and minor versions, making
semantic versioning inapplicable and MVS unviable. Under MVS, opam devolves into singular
dependencies (¦4.9), as packages are unable to express compatibility with multiple major versions.
For this reason, opam specifies no upper bounds by default, relying on extensive reverse dependency
checking of new package releases to verify type-level API compatibility.
-  Gibb et al.

   Nix sidesteps the spectrum entirely by treating every name-version pair as a distinct package
and requiring the exact version of a dependee to be specified. Derivations are parameterised by
their dependencies in the Nix DSL, so version selection is performed manually by the packager
rather than by a constraint solver. In the Nixpkgs package repository, typically only one version
of a package is included at a time, and breakages are often due to incompatibilities introduced by
updates.

   We can formalise the approaches underlying this spectrum as two independent ways to reduce
the complexity of resolution:

    (1) Restrict version constraints to lower bounds. With a total ordering  of versions
         (Definition 3.2.1), we redefine a dependency relation to only have a minimum bound, with
         a dependency as min (, ) where   ,    ,    , and  is the minimum bound. We
         replace the dependency closure condition (Definition 3.1.3.b) with,

                            . min (, 1) =  2   . (, 2)    1  2

         An incompatibility between a depender and a dependee satisfying this relationship is
         considered ill-specification; the depender and dependee authors must collaborate to fix it.
         Without upper bounds, any version above the maximum of all minimum bounds is valid, so
         a greedy algorithm suffices - selecting the minimum satisfying version for stability, as MVS
         does, or the latest for freshness. This reduces the problem to a graph traversal and version
         sorting in  (|min| + ||) time.
    (2) Remove version uniqueness. Remove resolution condition 3.1.3.c, allowing multiple
         versions of a package. Each dependency can be resolved independently, allowing a greedy
         algorithm to select any compatible version for each dependency. This reduces the problem
         to graph traversal in  (||) time.

   Go's MVS combines both approaches - the version uniqueness constraint is removed for different
major versions (approach 2), and within a major version, version constraints are restricted to a lower
bound (approach 1). Cargo also removes the version uniqueness constraint for different major ver-
sions, but the practical need for upper bounds within a major version reintroduces NP-completeness.
opam exploits neither, accepting NP-complete resolution in exchange for expressiveness, at the
cost of extensive compatibility testing. Nix adopts approach 2 as well as a restriction stronger than
approach 1: singular dependencies (¦4.9), where each dependency specifies exactly one version,
delegating version selection from the constraint solver to a Turing-complete packaging language.

   Where a package manager sits on this spectrum determines the sophistication of its resolver:
greedy algorithms suffice at the restricted end, while package managers accepting full NP-
completeness employ SAT solvers (Appendix C) or conflict-driven clause learning (CDCL) for
performance and error reporting. Similarly, lock files - snapshots of a resolution - are unnecessary
under MVS, where the resolution is determined by the minimum bounds alone, but are essential in
ecosystems where selecting the latest version makes the resolution non-deterministic over time.

4 Package Managers, Completely

We illustrate how a variety of properties of real-world package managers (¦2) can be modelled
by a minimally expressive core calculus (¦3.1) by extending the calculus and reducing these
extensions back to the core. We show this for conflicts (¦4.1), concurrent versions (¦4.2), peer
dependencies (¦4.3), features (¦4.4), package formulae (¦4.5), variable formulae (¦4.6), and virtual
packages (¦4.7). We also consider optional dependencies (¦4.8), which do not extend the calculus,
and singular dependencies (¦4.9), which are less expressive than the core.
Package Managers Ó la Carte                                                                     -

   We subscript definitions from the core calculus with a symbol representing the extension in
order to differentiate them from the reduction of the extension to the core. For example, in ¦4.1 we
use conflicts  as the defining symbol of the calculus and introduce  as  in Definition 3.1.2, and
 as  in Definition 3.1.1.d, in order to differentiate them from the use of  and  in the reduction
to the core (Definition 4.1.3). Unless we explicitly redefine a subscript of a core calculus definition -
as we do with version formula dependency  in Definition 3.2.4 - read it as defined in the core.

4.1 Conflicts

We define the Conflict Package Calculus to model conflicts (¦2.2.6).

   Definition 4.1.1 (Conflict). We define conflicts    ū ( ū P ( )) as a relation where an
element (, ) denotes that package    conflicts with package name    with versions
   .

   Definition 4.1.2 (Conflict Resolution). Given dependencies , conflicts , and root   , a
resolution    is valid if:

    (a) Core Resolution:   S(, ) (Definition 3.1.3).
    (b) Conflict Avoidance:    . (, ) =   . (, )  

         For every package in the resolution, a conflicting package must not be in the resolution.

We write S (, , ) for the set of all resolutions of  in  and .

   We reduce the Conflict Package Calculus to the core calculus by encoding each conflict as a
synthetic `conflict package' with precisely two versions: version 1 and version 0. The package
declaring the conflict depends on version 1, while each conflicting package depends on version 0.
Since both versions cannot coexist by version uniqueness, the two sides of the conflict are mutually
exclusive. Figure 2 shows an instance of the Conflict Package Calculus reduced to the core.

Package: A           A1             B2  A 1 B, {1, 2} 1 B 2               (, 1)(, {1, 2}, {1})
                                                   B, {1, 2} 0 B 1        (, 1)(, {1, 2}, {0})
Version: 1                    B1                                          (, 2)(, {1, 2}, {0})
Conflicts: B (<< 3)                         (c) Hypergraph of reduction.
                                                                               (d) Reduction.
(a) Debian syntax. (b) Hypergraph.

            Fig. 2. Conflict Package Calculus (, 1)(, {1, 2}) reduced to the core calculus.

   Definition 4.1.3 (Conflict Reduction). Given , , , and , we define a reduction to the core
calculus with , , and  , as follows:

(a) Packages:  =  and  =                       {(, , 0) , (, , 1)} where ,   

                                         (, )

(b) Dependencies:

             =                      { (, , {1})}  {(, ) (, , {0})}

                              (, )              

   Theorem 4.1.4 (Soundness). If  is a valid resolution in S(,  ), then  =    is a valid
resolution in S (, , ).

Theorem 4.1.5 (Completeness). If  is a valid resolution in S (, , ), then

 =   {(, , 1) | (, ),    }  {(, , 0) | (, ), (, )  ,   }

is a valid resolution in S(,  ).
-                                                                             Gibb et al.

4.2 Concurrent Versions

   # B/Cargo.toml                                   A1
   [dependencies]
   D = "=1"                (, 1)(, {1})         B1                    C1
                           (, 1)(, {1})
   # C/Cargo.toml          (, 1)(, {1})                         D3
   [dependencies]          (, 1)(, {3})                         D1
   D = "=3"                                     (c) Hypergraph illustration.
                         (b) Package Calculus.
     (a) Cargo syntax.

   Fig. 3. Dependencies exhibiting the `diamond dependency problem'.

   Figure 3 exhibits the `diamond dependency problem', so called because the graph with edges
{(, ), (, ), (, ), (, )} forms a diamond. With  = {(, {1})}, it has no valid resolution.
To address this, some package managers allow multiple versions of a package to exist in the
resolution (¦2.2.7). We define the Concurrent Package Calculus to model this behaviour, and show
how we can reduce it to the core calculus.

   Definition 4.2.1 (Granularity Function). We define  :    mapping a version to a granularity
which is the same value for conflicting versions of a package. For example, in Cargo we can define
( ..) =  to extract the major version of a package, and for npm or Nix () =  as they allow
duplication regardless of version. We can emulate the single-version condition with () = .

   Definition 4.2.2 (Concurrent Resolution). Given dependencies  , root  , and a granularity
function , a resolution  and parent relation    ū  are valid if:

    (a) Root Inclusion:  as  and  as  in Definition 3.1.3.a.
    (b) Parent Closure:     .  (, ) = !   . (, )    ((, ), )  

         A parent of a package is a package whose dependency caused its inclusion, and each parent
         has exactly one child per dependency.
    (c) Version Granularity:  (, ), (, )   .    = ()  ()
         Packages of the same name and different versions in  must have distinct values of their
         version applied to .

We write S (, ,  )  (, ) for the set of resolutions and parent relations of  in  under .

   Note that this means multiple versions of the same package name can be selected even if it would
be possible to use just one, which is consistent with Cargo's implementation.

   To reduce the Concurrent Package Calculus to the core calculus we push the granular version
into the package name so that version uniqueness in the core calculus enforces version granularity.
We introduce intermediate packages that allow for depending on multiple granular versions of
now-distinct package names. Figure 4 shows an instance of the Concurrent Package Calculus; its
reduction to the core appears in Figure 5.

   Definition 4.2.3 (Concurrent Reduction). Given  ,  ,  , and , we define a reduction to the
core calculus with , , and  , as follows:

    (a) Packages:
          (i)  (, )   . (, (), )   where , ()  
          (ii)  = (, (), ) where  = (, )

    (b) Dependencies: For each (, ) (, ):

                                                := {() |   }
Package Managers Ó la Carte                                                                             -

                                                                                  A 1.0.0

# B/Cargo.toml               (, 1.0.0) (, {1.0.0})                B 1.0.0 D 3.0.0 C 1.0.0
[dependencies]               (, 1.0.0) (, {1.0.0})                                 D 2.0.1
D = ">=1, <3"                (, 1.0.0) (, {1.0.0, 2.0.0, 2.0.1})                   D 2.0.0
                             (, 1.0.0) (, {2.0.0, 2.0.1, 3.0.0})                   D 1.0.0
# C/Cargo.toml
[dependencies]                 (b) Concurrent Package Calculus.     (c) Hypergraph illustration.
D = ">=2, <4"

(a) Cargo syntax.

Fig. 4. Concurrent Package Calculus dependencies where ( ..) = .

(i) Direct case (single granular version):
    If | | = 1 where  = { }, then (, (), ) (, , ).

(ii) Split case (multiple granular versions):
    Otherwise, introduce intermediate package name,

                                   := , ,  where   

      (A) From the intermediate packages to the dependees in its granular version.
               . (, )   and (, )  (, , {   | () =  })

       (B) From the depender package to the intermediate package with granular versions
            of the version set. (, (), )  (, )

   (, 1, 1.0.0)(, 1, {1.0.0})        B, 1 1.0.0                   A, 1 1.0.0                C, 1 1.0.0
   (, 1, 1.0.0)(, 1, {1.0.0})              B, 1.0.0, D 2          D, 3 3.0.0      C, 1.0.0, D 3
   (, 1, 1.0.0)(, 1.0.0, , {1, 2})         B, 1.0.0, D 1          D, 2 2.0.1      C, 1.0.0, D 2
(, 1.0.0, , 1)(, 1, {1.0.0})                                      D, 2 2.0.0
(, 1.0.0, , 2)(, 2, {2.0.0, 2.0.1})                               D, 1 1.0.0
   (, 1, 1.0.0)(, 1.0.0, , {2, 3})
(, 1.0.0, , 2)(, 2, {2.0.0, 2.0.1})
(, 1.0.0, , 3)(, 3, {3.0.0})

(a) Reduction to the core calculus.  (b) Hypergraph of reduction.

                             Fig. 5. Reduction of Figure 4 to the core calculus.

   Theorem 4.2.4 (Soundness). If  is a valid resolution in S(,  ), then
                                         = (, ) | (, (), )  

                    = ((, ), (, )) | (, , , )  , (, , )  
                      ((, ), (, )) | (, ) (, ), |{() |   }| = 1,
                                              (, (), )  ,   , (, (), )  

are a valid resolution and parent relation in S (, ,  ).
-                                                                                       Gibb et al.

   Theorem 4.2.5 (Completeness). If (, )  S (, ,  ), then
                 = (, (), ) | (, )  

                   (, , , ()) | (, ) (, ), (, )  , |{() |   }| > 1,
                                            (, )  ,   , ((, ), (, ))  

is a valid resolution in S(,  ).

4.3 Peer Dependencies

We extend the Concurrent Package Calculus to model peer dependencies (¦2.2.8) in the Peer
Package Calculus. Our formalisation captures npm's --legacy-peer-deps behaviour, though the
contemporary behaviour can also be modelled with minor modifications.

   Definition 4.3.1 (Peer Dependency). We define peer dependencies    ū ( ū P ( )) as a
relation where (, ) denotes that a parent of package  can only depend on the peer package
name  if it has a version in .

   Definition 4.3.2 (Peer Dependency Resolution). Given dependencies  , peer dependencies ,
granularity function , and root  , a resolution  and parent relation    ū  are valid if:

    (a) Concurrent Resolution: (, ) is valid in S (, ,  ) (Definition 4.2.2).
    (b) Peer Satisfaction:

             . (, )   . (, )     (, ) =    (  ). (, )  
         If a package  has a peer dependency on , and 's parent depends on , then the resolved
         version of  must satisfy both constraints.
We write S (, , ,  )  (, ) for the set of all resolutions and parent relations of  in 
and  under .

   We reduce the Peer Package Calculus to the core calculus with a modified Concurrent Package
Calculus (Definition 4.2.3) using intermediate package dependencies to constrain the peer package
version selection to the intersection of the parent and the child constraints. Figure 6 shows an
instance of the Peer Package Calculus reduced to the core.

   // B/package.json (, 1) (, {1})               A1    C3          A, 1 1    A, 1, C 3  C, 3 3
   "peerDependencies": (, 1) (, {2, 3})                           A, 1, B 1  A, 1, C 2  C, 2 2
                                                                             A, 1, C 1  C, 1 1
   {                                                   C2          B, 1 1
      "C": ">=1 <3"  (, 1)(, {1, 2})
                                                     
                                                 B1    C1
   }
                               (b) Peer Package

   (a) npm syntax.   Calculus.                   (c) Hypergraph.  (d) Hypergraph of reduction.

Fig. 6. Peer Package Calculus where parent  depends on child  with a peer dependency on  and () = .

   Definition 4.3.3 (Peer Dependency Reduction). Given  ,  , ,  , and , we define a reduction
to the core calculus with , , and  , as follows:

    (a) Packages:
          (i)  (, )   . (, (), )   where , ()  
         (ii)  = (, (), ) where  = (, )
Package Managers Ó la Carte  -

    (b) Dependencies: For each (, ) (, ), with  := , ,  where    :
          (i) Intermediate dependencies:
                (A) From the intermediate packages to the dependees.
                        . (, )   and (, )  (, (), {})
                 (B) From the depender package to the intermediate package. (, (), )  (, )
               Note we use the full version in the intermediate package to allow selection of an exact
               peer package version as the intersection of constraints, regardless of .
          (ii) Peer dependencies (another child  has a peer dependency on ):
               If (, ) (, ) and (, )(, ) for some   , then
                (A)   . (, )   and (, )  (, (), { })
                 (B)   . (, )(, ) = (, , , ) (, )

   Theorem 4.3.4 (Soundness). If   S(,  ), then the construction of Theorem 4.2.4 (substituting
 for  ) yields a valid resolution  and parent relation  in S (, , ,  ).

   Theorem 4.3.5 (Completeness). If (, )  S (, , ,  ), then

                        = (, (), ) | (, )  
                          (, , , ) | (, ) (, ), (, )  ,
                                               (, )  ,   , ((, ), (, ))  

is a valid resolution in S(,  ).

4.4 Features

We define the Feature Package Calculus to model features (¦2.2.9).

   Definition 4.4.1 (Feature). We define:

    (a)  as the set of possible features.
    (b)    ū  as a relation where (,  )   denotes package  supports feature  .

   Definition 4.4.2 (Feature Dependency). We define:

    (a) Parameterised dependencies    ū ( ū P ( ) ū P ( )) as a relation where an element
          (, ,  ) denotes that package    depends on package name    , with a set of
         compatible versions    , and a set of required features     . Note that this implies
           .     . ((, ),  )  .

    (b) Additional dependencies   ( ū  ) ū ( ū P ( ) ū P ( )) as a relation where an element
         (,  ) (, ,  ) denotes that package    with feature    depends on (, ,  ) as
         in  .

   Definition 4.4.3 (Feature Resolution). Given parameterised dependencies  , additional depen-
dencies , and root  , a resolution    ū P ( ) - where an element (,  )   represents
package  selected with features     - is valid if:

    (a) Root Inclusion: ( , )  
    (b) Parameterised Dependency Closure:

                 (,   )   .  (, ,  ) =    ,     . ((, ),  )  

         A dependency parameterised by features must be satisfied by a package with a compatible
         version and selected features.
    (c) Additional Dependency Closure:

        (,   )   .      . (,  ) (, ,  ) =    ,     . ((, ),  )  
-                                                                                           Gibb et al.

         A dependee added due to a feature selection must have its dependencies satisfied as with
         parameterised dependencies.
    (d) Feature Unification:  ((, ),  ), ((, ),  )   .   =  
    (e) Version Uniqueness:  ((, ),  ), ((, ),  )   .  = 

We write S ( , ,  ) for the set of all resolutions of  in  and .

   To reduce the Feature Package Calculus to the core calculus, we create packages representing
features selected for a package. Figure 7 shows an instance of the Feature Package Calculus; its
reduction to the core appears in Figure 8.

   # B/Cargo.toml                          (, 1) (, {1}, )           {} A 1                    {}
   [dependencies]                          (, 1) (, {1}, )                                  C1
   D = { version = "1",                    (, 1) (, {1}, {, })       B1
                                           (, 1) (, {1}, {})                                   {}
      features = ["alpha", "beta"] }  ((, 1), ) (, {1}, )                {, }           {}  F1
                                      ((, 1), ) (, {1}, )
   # C/Cargo.toml                                                    {}             D1
   [dependencies]
   D = { version = "1",                                                                 

      features = ["beta"] }                                          E1

   # D/Cargo.toml
   [features]
   alpha = ["dep:E"]
   beta = ["dep:F"]

   (a) Cargo syntax.                  (b) Feature Package Calculus.      (c) Hypergraph illustration.

                                      Fig. 7. Feature Package Calculus instance.

   Definition 4.4.4 (Feature Reduction). Given  ,  , , , and  , we define a reduction
to the core calculus with , , and  as follows:

    (a) Packages:
          (i)  = 
         (ii)  =   {(,  , ) | (, )   , ((, ),  )   } where ,    

    (b) Dependencies:
          (i)  (, )   .  ((, ),  )   . (,  , )(, { })
         (ii) For every  (, ,  ):
                (A) If   = , (, )
                 (B) If    ,     . (,  , )

         (iii) For every ((, ),  ) (, ,  ):
                (A) If   = , (,  , )(, )
                 (B) If    ,      . (,  , )(,  , )

   Theorem 4.4.5 (Soundness). If  is a valid resolution in S(,  ), then

                          = {((, ),  ) | (, )  ,   = { | (,  , )   }}

is a valid resolution in S ( , ,  ).
   Theorem 4.4.6 (Completeness). If  is a valid resolution in S ( , ,  ), then

                  = {(, ) | ((, ),  )   }  {(,  , ) | ((, ),  )   ,    }

is a valid resolution in S(,  ).
Package Managers Ó la Carte                                                                      -

                                                                                  A1

                                                                   B1                 C1

(, 1)(, {1})                 (, , 1)(, {1})           D,  1                               D,  1
(, 1)(, {1})                 (, , 1)(, {1})
(, 1)(, , {1})               (, , 1)(, {1})                                       D1
(, 1)(, , {1})               (, , 1)(, {1})
(, 1)(, , {1})
                                                      E1                                  F1

(a) Reduction to the core calculus.                   (b) Hypergraph of reduction.

                             Fig. 8. Reduction of Figure 7 to the core calculus.

4.5 Package Formula

We define the Package Formula Package Calculus to model package formulae (¦2.2.10) and then
show how we can reduce it to the core calculus.

Definition 4.5.1 (Package Formula). We define:

(a) The set of package formulae  is given by the grammar:

 ::= (, ) |    |    | ¼    ,   

(b) The satisfaction relation  |=  (resolution  satisfies formula  ) is defined:

   . (, )                        |=   |=                            |= 
                           DEP                                AND               NOT

     |= (, )                         |=                             |= ¼
       |=                               |= 
                       OR-L                              OR-R

    |=                               |=   

We say that  satisfies the formula  when  |=  holds.

   Definition 4.5.2 (Package Formula Dependency). We define package formula dependencies

   ū  as a relation where an element  denotes that package  depends on formula  .

   Definition 4.5.3 (Package Formula Resolution). Given dependencies  and root , a resolution
 is valid if:

    (a) Root Inclusion:  as  and  as  in Definition 3.1.3.a.
    (b) Formula Closure:    .  =  |= 
    (c) Version Uniqueness:  as  in Definition 3.1.3.c.

We write S (, ) for the set of all resolutions of  in .

   We reduce the Package Formula Package Calculus to the core calculus using virtual packages for
disjunction and the conflict encoding from Definition 4.1.3 for negation. Each disjunction node
introduces one synthetic package with two versions (one per disjunct), analogous to a Tseitin
auxiliary variable [53], keeping the reduction linear in the formula size and avoiding the exponential
blowup of na’ve conversion to conjunctive normal form. Figure D.1 shows an instance of the Package
Formula Package Calculus reduced to the core.

   Definition 4.5.4 (Package Formula Reduction). Given , , and , we define a reduction to
the core calculus with , , and  as follows:

    (a) Packages:
-                                                                                      Gibb et al.

         (i)  = 
        (ii)   
       (iii) For each subformula   , create (  , 0), (  , 1)  

             where     

       (iv) For each negation ¼(, ), create (, , 0), (, , 1)   where ,   

   (b) Formula Reduction: We define encoding function E :   P ():
         (i) Base case: E ( (, )) = {(, )}
        (ii) Conjunction: E ( (  )) = E ()  E ()

       (iii) Disjunction:

   E ( (  )) = {(  , {0, 1})}  E ((  , 0))  E ((  , 1))
           (iv) De Morgan's laws:

   E (¼(  )) = E (¼  ¼) E (¼(  )) = E (¼  ¼)

    (v) Double negation: E (¼¼ ) = E ( )
   (vi) Negation: E (¼(, )) = {(, , {1})}  {(, )(, , {0}) |   }
   where    . E ()  

   Theorem 4.5.5 (Soundness). If  is a valid resolution in S(,  ), then  =    is a valid
resolution in S (, ).

   Theorem 4.5.6 (Completeness). If  is a valid resolution in S (, ), define the witness set
 ( ) for a formula  with  |=  applying De Morgan's laws:

    ((, )) =              (  ) =  ()   ()

    (¼(, )) = {(, , 1)}   (  ) = {(  , 0)}   () if  |= 
                                              {(  , 1)}   () otherwise

Then  =    ( ) is a valid resolution in S(,  ).

                          
                          

4.6 Variable Formula
We define the Variable Formula Package Calculus to model variable formulae (¦2.2.12).

   Definition 4.6.1 (Variable Formula). Extending the Package Formula (Definition 4.5.1) we define:

   (a) The set of global variables , the set of local variables , the set of variable values , the set

       of the values of      that exist  , total ordering  on , and assignment function
        : (  ( ū ))  .
   (b) The set of variable formulae  is given by the grammar:

    ::= (, ) |    |    | ¼ |    |     ::=  | > |  | < | = |    

   (c) Variable formula dependencies    ū  as in Definition 4.5.2.
   (d) The satisfaction relation (, ) |= ( ) (resolution  and assignment  satisfies depen-

       dency  ) extends Definition 4.5.1.b with the judgment form carrying assignment  and
       dependency context . The DEP, AND, OR, and NOT rules carry over unchanged. We
       add the following: taking  as the comparison operator in  :

           ()                              ((, ))  
                                 GCP                               LCP

   (, ) |= (  )                       (, ) |= (  )

We say that (, ) satisfies the dependency  when (, ) |= ( ) holds.
Package Managers Ó la Carte  -

   Definition 4.6.2 (Variable Formula Resolution). Given dependencies  and root , a resolution
 and assignment  are valid if:

    (a) Root Inclusion:  as  and  as  in Definition 3.1.3.a.
    (b) Formula Closure:    .  = (, ) |= ( )
    (c) Version Uniqueness:  as  in Definition 3.1.3.c.
We write S (, )  (, ) for the set of all resolutions and variable assignments of  in .

   Variable formulae capture two distinct patterns in package managers: package-level platform
constraints (such as npm's "os": ["linux"]) can be represented as a dependency on a variable
with a particular value, while filtered dependencies (such as opam's depends: ["foo" {os =
"linux"}]) require a formula: ¼(os = linux)  (foo  os = linux). By lifting cross-ecosystem
dependencies into dependency resolution, variables such as the Linux distribution can themselves

be solved for - selecting the distribution that provides the freshest set of system dependencies.

   To reduce the Variable Formula Package Calculus to the core, we extend the Package Formula

Reduction (Definition 4.5.4).

   Definition 4.6.3 (Variable Formula Reduction). Given , , and , we define a reduction to
the core calculus with , , and  as follows:

    (a) Package Reduction: We extend Definition 4.5.4.a with:
          (i)    .    . (, )   where   
          (ii)    .    .     . (, , )   where ,   

    (b) Formula Reduction: We extend the encoding function E (Definition 4.5.4.b) with:
          (i) Global variable comparison: E (  ) = {(, {   |   })}
          (ii) Local variable comparison: E (  ) = {(, , {   |   })}

         (iii) Negated variable comparison (» denotes the complement:  is <, > is , = is , etc.):

                E (¼(  )) = E ( » ) E (¼(  )) = E ( » )

         For each  in  add E () to .
   Theorem 4.6.4 (Soundness). If  is a valid resolution in S(,  ), then  =    and

              = {(, ) |   , (, )   }  {((, ), ) |   ,   , (, , )   }

are a valid resolution and assignment in S (, ).
   Theorem 4.6.5 (Completeness). If (, )  S (, ), define the witness set  ( ) as in

Theorem 4.5.6, extending with base cases  (  ) =  (  ) =  and using (, ) |= (Ę)
for satisfaction tests. Then

                                 =    ( )  {(, ) | (, )   }

                                                             
                                                             

is a valid resolution in S(,  ).

4.7 Virtual Packages

We define the Virtual Package Calculus to model virtual packages (¦2.2.11).

   Definition 4.7.1 (Virtual Package Provides). We define provides    ū ( ū (  {})) as a
relation where an element (, ) denotes that package  provides a package name    with
version     {}, and implies that   . We define         {}, where  acts
as a wildcard version matching any version set. The package name  may be virtual, where it does
not exist in , or a real package that is also provided by :  (, )  .  = .
-                                                                                 Gibb et al.

   Definition 4.7.2 (Virtual Package Resolution). Given dependencies , provides , and root ,
a resolution    and provider relation    ū  are valid if:

    (a) Root Inclusion:  as  and  as  in Definition 3.1.3.a.
    (b) Virtual Dependency Closure:

      .  (, ) =    . (, )  
                                ! (, )  .    . (, )(, )  ((, ), )  

         For each dependency of a package in the resolution, either a compatible package or a unique
         package providing a compatible package, witnessed by , must be selected.
    (c) Version Uniqueness:  as  in Definition 3.1.3.c.
We write S (, , )  (, ) for the set of all resolutions and provider relations of  in .

   We reduce the Virtual Package Calculus to the core calculus using intermediate packages whose
versions encode which provider is selected. Figure D.2 shows an instance of the Virtual Package
Calculus reduced to the core.

   Definition 4.7.3 (Virtual Package Reduction). Given , , , and , we define a reduction to
the core calculus with , , and  , as follows:

    (a) Packages:  = 

    =   (, , , ) |  (, ), (, )(, ),   
              (, , , ) |  (, ),   , (, )  ,  ,   . (, )

       where ,    and , , ,   
   (b) Dependencies:

    = (, )                        |  (, ), ,   . (, )
      (, , )
                                  |  (, ),  ,   . (, ),
                                    = {,  | (, )(, ),   }

                                   {,  |   , (, )  ,  ,   . (, )}

    (, , , )(, { }) |  (, ), (, )(, ),   

    (, , , )(, {}) |  (, ),   , (, )  ,  ,   . (, )

   Theorem 4.7.4 (Soundness). If  is a valid resolution in S(,  ) then  =    and

               = ((, ), ) |   , (, , , )  

are a valid resolution and provider relation in S (, , ).
   Theorem 4.7.5 (Completeness). If (, )  S (, , ), then

    =   (, , , ) |   ,  (, ),  ,   . (, ), (, )  ,   
             (, , , ) |   ,  (, ), ((, ), )  

is a valid resolution in S(,  ).

4.8 Optional Dependencies

A valid resolution (Definition 3.1.3) determines which packages to install, but not the order in which
to install them. Package managers like opam, as part of their deployment (¦2.1.3), must linearise
the resolution into a sequence of build actions such that all the dependees of a package are built
Package Managers Ó la Carte  -

before the depender itself. This requires a topological sort of the dependency graph induced by the
resolution - which is only possible when that graph is acyclic.

   In practice, dependency graphs can contain cycles. In Debian, for example, libgcc-s1 depends
on libc6 (it requires the C library at run time), while libc6 depends on libgcc-s1 (it requires the
GCC runtime support library). Both packages are valid in a resolution, but no linear installation
order can satisfy both ordering constraints simultaneously. APT handles this by breaking cycles at
an arbitrary point and relying on dpkg's ability to partially unpack packages before their dependees
are fully configured [6]. In opam, packages can be marked with the post variable, which indicates
that the dependee is not required at build time, allowing the cycle to be broken explicitly. Other
package managers avoid the problem entirely: npm lays out files in nested directories and relies on
Node.js's module loader to handle cycles between modules.

   We formalise this installation ordering as the build graph.
   Definition 4.8.1 (Build Graph). Given dependencies  (Definition 3.1.2) and a resolution 
(Definition 3.1.3) the build graph is a directed graph with vertices  and edges:

                                 = {(, (, )) |  , (, ), (, )   }

   We show that optional dependencies (¦2.2.13) are purely a build graph consideration: they affect
the installation ordering but not the resolution.

   Definition 4.8.2 (Optional Dependency). We define optional dependencies as a relation  
 ū ( ū P ( )). We denote an element of  as  (, ) where package  will use package  with
version    if it is in the resolution.

   When creating a build graph (Definition 4.8.1) from the resolution, optional dependees are
required before their depender.

      = {(, (, )) |   , (, ), (, )   }  {(, (, )) |   ,  (, ), (, )   }

   Example 4.8.3. Consider,

             (, 1)(, {1}) (, 1)(, {1}) (, 1)(, {1}) (, 1) (, {1})

For  = {(, {1})}, the resolution is  = {, (, 1), (, 1)}, and the build graph is  = {((, 1), (, 1))}.
For  = {(, {1})}, the resolution is  = {, (, 1), (, 1), (, 1), (, 1)}, and   ((, 1), (, 1)).

   We can trivially reduce optional dependencies to the core calculus by omitting them; they have
no effect on the resolution S(,  ). Package  can be resolved regardless of 's presence. When
assembling the build graph, if  (, ) and (, )   with   , then (, (, ))   always and
there is no mechanism to disable this edge. This model captures opam's behaviour where optional
dependencies are purely a build-ordering mechanism with no resolution-time effects.

4.9 Singular Dependencies

Unlike the previous extensions, singular dependencies do not extend the core calculus - they restrict
it. Nix, Guix, and Unison support only a single, exact version of a package as a dependee, delegating
the responsibility of version solving from the package manager to the packager. Where the core
calculus expresses a dependency on a set of compatible versions and leaves it to the resolver to
select among them, singular dependencies require the packager to commit to a specific version at
packaging time.

   Definition 4.9.1 (Singular Dependency). We define singular dependencies    ū as a relation
where an element  denotes a package  expressing a dependency on a package .
-                             Gibb et al.

   Definition 4.9.2 (Singular Dependency Resolution). Given singular dependencies  and root  ,
a resolution  is valid if:

    (a) Root Inclusion:  as  and  as  in Definition 3.1.3.a.
    (b) Dependency Closure:     .  =   
    (c) Version Uniqueness:  as  in Definition 3.1.3.c.

   Because singular dependencies are less expressive than the core, we cannot reduce the core
calculus to them. This delegation of version solving to the packager means that Nix effectively
performs resolution at packaging time rather than install time (¦2.1.2): tools such as cargo2nix,
opam-nix, and poetry2nix invoke an ecosystem-specific resolver and emit Nix derivations with
locked version selections. Each such tool is a bespoke frontend for a single ecosystem.

5 Package Managers Ó la Carte

We return to the motivating example of ¦1, using four package managers for a single project.
Dependencies between these ecosystems are unversioned; the binary will fail if APT has not been
used to install the required C libraries and drivers from the Debian repository at compatible versions.
Build sandboxing prevents one package manager from invoking another, so opam cannot call Cargo
during a sandboxed build. This leads to ad hoc solutions, such as opam invoking a system package
manager to install dependencies via its depext mechanism [2]. Another workaround is vendoring
dependees across ecosystems - copying the source code into a project's version control system -
so that versions are fixed and dependencies are available inside sandboxed build environments.
Similarly, containerisation technologies, like Docker, are used to sidestep the problem by bundling
all dependencies together. To avoid vendoring or bundling in containers, packages can be duplicated
between ecosystem-specific package formats, such as Rust projects packaged in opam. But these
workarounds carry serious costs: vendored and duplicated packages require ongoing maintenance
when new versions are released; and the dependencies they introduce are hidden from package
managers, rendering security vulnerability tracking incomplete.

   Mechanically translating packages between  ecosystems directly requires 2 translators, each
of which must understand both the source and target dependency languages. We observe that the
reductions of ¦4 are proofs that the extensions are expressible in the core calculus, but they also
serve as compilation passes that lower extended instances to core instances, and can be reversed to
lift reduced core instances to extended instances. The Package Calculus serves as an intermediate
representation for dependency expression: each ecosystem need only define a translation to and
from the core, reducing the translation problem from 2 to 2 translators.

5.1 Transpiling Packaging Languages

Each ecosystem natively supports a subset of the extensions defined in ¦4 (Table 1). A translation
from ecosystem  to ecosystem  follows the pipeline:

   parse  lower  lift  emit
    -----  -----  ---  ---- 

where  and  denote the source and target DSLs, and  and  denote the source and target
dependencies, respectively.

   Lowering (frontend). The source DSL is parsed into an instance of the extended calculus deter-
mined by , and a lowering reduces this to a core calculus instance (,  ). When an ecosystem
supports multiple extensions, the lowering composes their reductions, subject to the ordering and

type-interaction constraints discussed in ¦5.2. Soundness and completeness ensure valid resolutions
are preserved: S(,  ) S (, ).
Package Managers Ó la Carte                                                         -

   Lifting (backend). A lifting reconstructs an extended instance from the core. Each reduction
encodes extended constructs as synthetic packages with structured names Ę   ; the backend
decodes these names to recover the original constructs. Where the target ecosystem does not
support an extension, the core encoding is emitted directly. Lifting is desirable because a solver that
understands the target's native extensions can exploit their structure - for example, propagating
conflicts directly rather than through synthetic packages.

   Each translation therefore need only handle the extensions its ecosystem supports: for instance,
Cargo dependencies can be lowered to the core and solved by an opam-based resolver that knows
nothing about features, yet the feature selections can be extracted from the core resolution (Theo-
rems 4.4.5 and 4.4.6). By the same token, as-yet-undiscovered dependency expression semantics
admitting a sound and complete reduction to the core can be incorporated into a translation.

5.2 Composition of Extensions

Real-world package managers combine multiple extensions: Cargo, for example, uses both concur-
rent versions (¦4.2) and features (¦4.4). We show that features and concurrent version reductions
compose with no modifications, and discuss the degree to which other reductions compose.

5.2.1 Features and Concurrent Versions. The feature reduction (Definition 4.4.4) is version-preserving:
every synthetic package (,  , ) inherits version  from the base package (, ). No new versions
are introduced, so the version granularity structure passes through unchanged.

# B/Cargo.toml                                        {} A 1 {}
[dependencies]
D = { version = ">=1, <3",   (, 1) (, {1}, )          B1           C1
                             (, 1) (, {1}, )
   features = ["alpha"] }    (, 1) (, {1, 2}, { })        D3
                             (, 1) (, {2, 3}, { })
# C/Cargo.toml                                        {}  D2       {}
[dependencies]                (b) Concurrent Feature
D = { version = ">=2, <4",       Package Calculus.                    D1
                                                      (c) Hypergraph illustration.
   features = ["beta"] }

     (a) Cargo syntax.

Fig. 9. Concurrent Feature Package Calculus instance where () = .

   Definition 5.2.1 (Concurrent Feature Resolution). Given parameterised dependencies  , ad-
ditional dependencies , granularity function , and root  , a resolution    ū P ( ) and
parent relation  are valid if they satisfy Definitions 4.4.3.a-4.4.3.d (with  for  ), and:

    (a) Parent Closure:
          (,   )   .  (, ,  ) = !   ,  . ((, ),  )    ((, ), )  

    (b) Version Granularity:  ((, ),  ), ((, ),  )   .    = ()  ()

We write S ( , , ,  )  ( , ) for the set of all such resolutions and parent relations.

   Figure 9 shows an instance of the Concurrent Feature Package Calculus reduced to the core in

Figure D.3.

   Theorem 5.2.2 (Soundness). If   S(,  ), then the construction of Theorem 4.2.4 yields (, ) 
S (, ,  ), and the construction of Theorem 4.4.5 (substituting  for  and  for  ) yields
( ,  )  S ( , , ,  ).
-  Gibb et al.

   Theorem 5.2.3 (Completeness). If ( , )  S ( , , ,  ), then the construction of Theo-
rem 4.4.6 (substituting  for  and  for ) yields (, )  S (, ,  ), and the construction
of Theorem 4.2.5 applied to (, ) yields   S(,  ).

5.2.2 Limits of Composition. The composition above succeeds because the feature reduction is
version-preserving: it does not introduce new versions, so version granularity passes through
unchanged. Not all reductions compose so cleanly.

   Invariant Violation. The conflict reduction (Definition 4.1.3) and the negation encoding of the
package formula reduction (Definition 4.5.4) both introduce synthetic packages with two versions
that encode mutual exclusion via version uniqueness. The Concurrent Package Calculus relaxes
version uniqueness to version granularity, allowing both versions to coexist and breaking the
encoding.

   A correct composition requires reducing concurrent versions first - restoring version uniqueness
- then applying the conflict or formula reduction. However, the concurrent reduction renames
packages via , (), so the conflict and formula reductions must be made aware of the concurrent
versions reduction. Alternatively the concurrent versions reduction could be made conflict-aware,
so that the granularity function for the synthetic packages always returns  and they conflict in
Definition 4.2.2.c.

   Interacting Extensions. Even when invariants are preserved, extensions whose dependency types
interact require reductions that are aware of each other's constructs. For example, Portage combines
features (¦4.4) with package formulae (¦4.5), and a formula atom can carry feature annotations: ||
( foo[bar] baz ). A correct composition requires the formula atom (, ) (Definition 4.5.1.a) to
support features (e.g. (, ,  )), and the feature additional dependency target (, ,  ) (Defini-
tion 4.4.3.c) to support formulae (e.g.  ).

   Ecosystem Variation. The semantics of individual extensions can also differ subtly between
ecosystems. For example, npm supports two different behaviours for peer dependencies depend-
ing on the resolver version (¦4.3), and opam's filtered dependencies combine package formulae
with variable conditionals in a single construct, which we represent by composing the package
formula (¦4.5) and variable formula (¦4.6) extensions - though a dedicated first-class extension
could model this more directly. The extensions and reductions presented here are not intended
as a fixed catalogue, but as a framework: extensions and reductions can be defined to capture
ecosystem-specific semantics, equipped with reductions to the core calculus, and composed with
existing extensions following the principles above. By using a minimal core calculus we describe
the semantics of dependency expression precisely and prevent mistakenly translating functionality
from one ecosystem to functionality in another ecosystem with the same name but subtly different
semantics.

6 Related Work

   Dependency Resolution. The idea of using a formalism to aid with package versioning dates
back to the Optimal Package Install/Uninstall Manager (Opium) [54] in 2007, which adapted
Debian's apt-get to use a SAT solver for dependency resolution. Opium's formalism is close to
our Conflict Package Calculus; it encodes Debian's dependencies and conflicts in a SAT problem,
expanding version formulae to sets. We describe how a dependency resolution algorithm can
prioritise fresher resolutions (Definition 3.2.2); Opium goes further by optimising an objective
function over resolutions via pseudo-boolean and ILP solvers, which it uses to define the install
and uninstall problems.
Package Managers Ó la Carte  -

   Later work on the Common Upgradeability Description Format (CUDF) [52] generalised the
solver interface into a file format that could be consumed by specialised package resolvers. One
such early resolver used answer-set programming [31], which also found use in high-performance
computing software infrastructure for solving dependencies with support for a rich set of user-
specified resolver preferences [29]. CUDF provides a fixed vocabulary of dependency constructs -
depends, conflicts, and provides - with integer versions, rich optimisation criteria, and support
for upgrade semantics (modelling the currently installed state). Despite the goal to be the common
format, the fixed-vocabulary nature of CUDF means it has not seen adoption beyond the Debian
and opam ecosystems, and package managers with varying semantics have only proliferated since:
Cargo's features and concurrent versions, npm's peer dependencies, and pip's extras; none fit
CUDF's fixed vocabulary.

   Abate et al. [9] observed in 2020 that while SAT-based dependency solving did find traction
among some package manager implementations, reusable components for version solving had
not seen wider adoption. In recent years, some of the larger package ecosystems such as npm are
under severe scaling pressure, and it is becoming increasingly important to revisit the question of
how to reuse knowledge across ecosystems. For example, PacSolve's MaxSMT based resolver is a
drop-in replacement for npm that reduced vulnerabilities in resolved packages and picked fresher
and fewer dependees [44]. Approximate solving has also been useful for package selection under
bounded latency situations [35]. However, these systems are all tied to a single ecosystem: PacSolve
targets npm, Spack's ASP solver targets HPC, and opam's CUDF bridge targets OCaml - none can
resolve dependencies that cross ecosystem boundaries. PubGrub [55] is a CDCL-based dependency
resolution algorithm created for Pub (Dart's package manager) that has since been adopted by
Bundler (Ruby), Poetry (Python), and Swift Package Manager, among others. The pubgrub-rs Rust
implementation [46] contains an encoding of concurrent versions and features very similar to our
reductions in ¦4.2 and ¦4.4.

   Open-source Ecosystems. There is an enormous and increasing amount of open-source software
being published, and the problem of managing dependencies will only grow more acute. Soft-
ware Heritage is building a universal archive of this source code [11], and the Package Calculus
offers the chance to build a higher-level and cross-ecosystem semantic representation of these
interdependencies.

   Maintainers of some of the key distributions such as Debian (which form the basis for many
other downstream products) are having to scale their automation in order to manage the ever-
growing package set [15] and vulnerabilities [38]. The Package Calculus approach of bringing
common semantic meaning across language ecosystems should help reuse tooling that is currently
language-specific to support the distribution maintainers such as those in Debian or Red Hat-based
Linux. Being able to reason about large-scale dependencies is also important for alleviating the
reproducibility crisis in scientific computing [36], and the Package Calculus could (with sufficient
tooling) support the longer-term availability of published scientific results.

   Build Systems. Package management is closely tied to build systems, which are also surprisingly
poorly specified [40]. Build systems and package management systems are sometimes unified in
newer toolchains (Table 1), but doing so makes it difficult to compose projects that span ecosystems
(e.g. consider the difficulty of depending on a Rust library from OCaml code with just two package
managers involved). Therefore, the Package Calculus approach of specifying a formalism that
can be implemented as a translation library across package ecosystems maintains the separation
from the underlying build systems. In the long term, creating a composable formal theory of build
systems and package managers [12] would let us combine cross-ecosystem codebases to conduct
correctness testing across the vast amount of source code published [39]. It would also allow the
-  Gibb et al.

use of fuzzing techniques on the Package Calculus to spot incorrect packaging specifications, a
technique already successfully applied to build systems [37].

   Software Supply Chain Security. The increasing complexity of cross-ecosystem dependency
chains puts pressure on the security of software supply chains, both on the choice of dependees
selected for a software project [13, 14, 56] but also in vulnerabilities in the many package managers
available [18, 19]. Software Bill of Materials (SBOMs) manifests are being rapidly adopted [21]
to specify the full set of versioned dependees that go into a given application. However, the
same problem of uneven quality across ecosystems applies here, with the JavaScript ecosystem
being particularly unpredictable [47]. The Package Calculus could be used to generate SBOMs
systematically, to reduce transitive trust dependencies across language and OS ecosystems [49],
drop resource usage by debloating unnecessary packages [43], and reduce the latency of applying
security updates in third-party dependees [48, 50].

7 Conclusion

We have presented the Package Calculus, a minimal formal system for dependency resolution
that captures the common core of over thirty package managers, and modelled their diversity as
extensions with reductions back to the core. The reductions serve a dual purpose: they prove the ex-
tensions are expressible in the core, but also act as compilation passes that lower ecosystem-specific
dependency languages into a common intermediate representation, reducing cross-ecosystem trans-
lation from 2 to 2 translators. Some reductions compose cleanly - we proved this for features
with concurrent versions - while others require ordering constraints or mutual awareness (¦5.2.2).
Returning to ¦1, this provides the formal foundation for dependencies from OCaml, Python, Rust,
and system packages to be lowered, resolved together, and lifted back - rather than relying on four
separate uncoordinated tools. The formalism does not model deployment or build semantics, which
remain ecosystem-specific; practical tooling to parse ecosystem DSLs into the calculus and emit
solutions back is a natural next step.

References

 [1] 1995. Comprehensive Perl Archive Network. https://www.cpan.org/
 [2] 2013. OCaml Package Manager, The opam manual. https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Manual.html
 [3] 2024. The Cargo Book. https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/
 [4] 2024. Cargo Resolver. https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/blob/15fbd2f607d4defc87053b8b76bf5038f2483cf4/src/cargo/

       core/resolver/mod.rs
 [5] 2024. Debian Policy Manual: Chapter 5 - Control files and their fields. https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-

       controlfields.html
 [6] 2024. Debian Policy Manual: Chapter 7 - Declaring relationships between packages. https://www.debian.org/doc/

       debian-policy/ch-relationships.html
 [7] 2024. Go Modules Reference. https://go.dev/ref/mod
 [8] 2024. The Haskell Cabal. https://www.haskell.org/cabal/
 [9] Pietro Abate, Roberto Di Cosmo, Georgios Gousios, and Stefano Zacchiroli. 2020. Dependency Solving Is Still Hard, but

      We Are Getting Better at It. In 2020 IEEE 27th International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering
      (SANER). 547-551. doi:10.1109/SANER48275.2020.9054837
[10] aboutcode-org. 2024. univers: a library for parsing and comparing software package versions and version ranges.
       https://github.com/aboutcode-org/univers
[11] Jean-Franńois Abramatic, Roberto Di Cosmo, and Stefano Zacchiroli. 2018. Building the universal archive of source
       code. Commun. ACM 61, 10 (Sept. 2018), 29-31. doi:10.1145/3183558
[12] Snorri Agnarsson and M. S. Krishnamoorthy. 1985. Towards a theory of packages. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 20, 7 (June
      1985), 117-130. doi:10.1145/17919.806833
[13] Mahmoud Alfadel, Diego Elias Costa, and Emad Shihab. 2023. Empirical analysis of security vulnerabilities in Python
       packages. Empirical Software Engineering 28, 3 (March 2023). doi:10.1007/s10664-022-10278-4
[14] Mahmoud Alfadel, Diego Elias Costa, Emad Shihab, and Bram Adams. 2023. On the Discoverability of npm Vulnerabil-
       ities in Node.js Projects. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 32, 4, Article 91 (May 2023), 27 pages. doi:10.1145/3571848
Package Managers Ó la Carte  -

[15] Benedikt Becker, Nicolas Jeannerod, Claude Marchķ, Yann Rķgis-Gianas, Mihaela Sighireanu, and Ralf Treinen. 2022.
      The CoLiS platform for the analysis of maintainer scripts in Debian software packages. International Journal on
      Software Tools for Technology Transfer 24, 5 (Sept. 2022), 717-733. doi:10.1007/s10009-022-00671-1

[16] Jon Bentley. 1986. Programming pearls: little languages. Commun. ACM 29, 8 (Aug. 1986), 711-721. doi:10.1145/6424.
      315691

[17] Claude Berge. 1970. Graphes et hypergraphes. Dunod, Paris, France.
[18] Aarnav M. Bos. 2023. A Review of Attacks Against Language-Based Package Managers. doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2302.08959

[19] Justin Cappos, Justin Samuel, Scott Baker, and John H. Hartman. 2008. A look in the mirror: attacks on package
      managers. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (Alexandria, Virginia,
      USA) (CCS '08). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 565-574. doi:10.1145/1455770.1455841

[20] Paul Chiusano and R·nar Bjarnason. 2020. Unison: A friendly programming language from the future. https:

      //www.unison-lang.org/

[21] Serena Cofano, Giacomo Benedetti, and Matteo Dell'Amico. 2024. SBOM Generation Tools in the Python Ecosystem:

      an In-Detail Analysis. doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2409.01214
[22] Stephen A. Cook. 1971. The complexity of theorem-proving procedures. In Proceedings of the Third Annual ACM

      Symposium on Theory of Computing (Shaker Heights, Ohio, USA) (STOC '71). Association for Computing Machinery,
      New York, NY, USA, 151-158. doi:10.1145/800157.805047
[23] Ludovic CourtĶs. 2013. Functional package management with guix. arXiv preprint arXiv:1305.4584 (2013).
[24] Russ Cox. 2016. Version SAT. https://research.swtch.com/version-sat
[25] Russ Cox. 2018. Go & Versioning: Minimal Version Selection. https://research.swtch.com/vgo-mvs

[26] Roberto Di Cosmo. 2005. EDOS Deliverable WP2-D2.1: Report on Formal Management of Software Dependencies.

      https://hal.science/hal-00697463

[27] Eelco Dolstra, Merijn de Jonge, and Eelco Visser. 2004. Nix: A Safe and Policy-Free System for Software Deployment.
      In Proceedings of the 18th USENIX Conference on System Administration (Atlanta, GA) (LISA '04). USENIX Association,
      USA, 79-92.

[28] Eelco Dolstra and Andres L÷h. 2008. NixOS: a purely functional Linux distribution. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM
      SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming (Victoria, BC, Canada) (ICFP '08). Association for
      Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 367-378. doi:10.1145/1411204.1411255

[29] Todd Gamblin, Massimiliano Culpo, Gregory Becker, and Sergei Shudler. 2022. Using Answer Set Programming for
      HPC Dependency Solving. In SC22: International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and
      Analysis. IEEE, 1-15. doi:10.1109/SC41404.2022.00040

[30] Todd Gamblin, Matthew LeGendre, Michael R. Collette, Gregory L. Lee, Adam Moody, Bronis R. de Supinski, and Scott
      Futral. 2015. The Spack package manager: bringing order to HPC software chaos. In Proceedings of the International
      Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (Austin, Texas) (SC '15). Association for
      Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 40, 12 pages. doi:10.1145/2807591.2807623

[31] Martin Gebser, Roland Kaminski, Benjamin Kaufmann, and Torsten Schaub. 2011. Multi-Criteria Optimization in
      Answer Set Programming. In Technical Communications of the 27th International Conference on Logic Programming
      (ICLP'11) (Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), Vol. 11), John P. Gallagher and Michael Gelfond
      (Eds.). Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum f³r Informatik, Dagstuhl, Germany, 1-10. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ICLP.2011.1

[32] George D Greenwade. 1993. The comprehensive TEX archive network (ctan). TUGBoat 14, 3 (1993), 342-351.
[33] Kurt Hornik. 2012. The comprehensive R archive network. Wiley interdisciplinary reviews: Computational statistics 4,

      4 (2012), 394-398.
[34] Paul Hudak. 1996. Building domain-specific embedded languages. ACM Comput. Surv. 28, 4es (Dec. 1996), 196-es.

      doi:10.1145/242224.242477

[35] Alexey Ignatiev, Mikolßs Janota, and Joao Marques-Silva. 2014. Towards efficient optimization in package management
      systems. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering (Hyderabad, India) (ICSE 2014).
      Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 745-755. doi:10.1145/2568225.2568306

[36] Peter Ivie and Douglas Thain. 2018. Reproducibility in Scientific Computing. ACM Comput. Surv. 51, 3, Article 63 (July
      2018), 36 pages. doi:10.1145/3186266

[37] Nandor Licker and Andrew Rice. 2019. Detecting Incorrect Build Rules. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference
      on Software Engineering (ICSE). 1234-1244. doi:10.1109/ICSE.2019.00125

[38] Jiahuei Lin, Haoxiang Zhang, Bram Adams, and Ahmed E. Hassan. 2023. Vulnerability management in Linux
      distributions: An empirical study on Debian and Fedora. Empirical Software Engineering 28, 2 (Feb. 2023). doi:10.1007/
      s10664-022-10267-7

[39] Christian Macho, Fabian Oraze, and Martin Pinzger. 2024. DValidator: An approach for validating dependencies in
      build configurations. Journal of Systems and Software 209 (2024), 111916. doi:10.1016/j.jss.2023.111916
-  Gibb et al.

[40] Andrey Mokhov, Neil Mitchell, and Simon Peyton Jones. 2018. Build systems a la carte. In International Conference on
      Functional Programming (ICFP'18). ACM. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/build-systems-la-
      carte/

[41] Van-Hau Nguyen, Van-Quyet Nguyen, Kyungbaek Kim, and Pedro Barahona. 2021. Empirical Study on SAT-Encodings
      of the At-Most-One Constraint. In The 9th International Conference on Smart Media and Applications (Jeju, Republic of
      Korea) (SMA 2020). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 470-475. doi:10.1145/3426020.3426170

[42] package-url. 2024. vers: a mostly universal version range specifier. https://github.com/package-url/vers-spec
[43] Pardis Pashakhanloo, Aravind Machiry, Hyonyoung Choi, Anthony Canino, Kihong Heo, Insup Lee, and Mayur Naik.

      2022. PacJam: Securing Dependencies Continuously via Package-Oriented Debloating. In Proceedings of the 2022
      ACM on Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security (Nagasaki, Japan) (ASIA CCS '22). Association for
      Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 903-916. doi:10.1145/3488932.3524054
[44] Donald Pinckney, Federico Cassano, Arjun Guha, Jonathan Bell, Massimiliano Culpo, and Todd Gamblin. 2023. Flexible
      and Optimal Dependency Management via Max-SMT. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software
      Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 1418-1429. doi:10.1109/ICSE48619.2023.00124
[45] Tom Preston-Werner. 2023. Semantic Versioning 2.0.0. https://semver.org/
[46] pubgrub-rs contributors. 2020. pubgrub-rs: PubGrub version solving algorithm implemented in Rust. https://github.
      com/pubgrub-rs/pubgrub
[47] Md Fazle Rabbi, Arifa Islam Champa, Costain Nachuma, and Minhaz Fahim Zibran. 2024. SBOM Generation Tools
      Under Microscope: A Focus on The npm Ecosystem. In Proceedings of the 39th ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on Applied
      Computing (Avila, Spain) (SAC '24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1233-1241. doi:10.
      1145/3605098.3635927
[48] Kristiina Rahkema and Dietmar Pfahl. 2022. Analysing the Relationship Between Dependency Definition and Updating
      Practice When Using Third-Party Libraries. In Product-Focused Software Process Improvement, Davide Taibi, Marco
      Kuhrmann, Tommi Mikkonen, Jil Kl³nder, and Pekka Abrahamsson (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham,
      90-107.
[49] Martin Schwaighofer, Michael Roland, and Renķ Mayrhofer. 2024. Extending Cloud Build Systems to Eliminate
      Transitive Trust. In ACM Workshop on Software Supply Chain Offensive Research and Ecosystem Defenses (SCORED24)
      (Salt Lake City, Utah, USA). ACM.
[50] Jacob Stringer, Amjed Tahir, Kelly Blincoe, and Jens Dietrich. 2020. Technical Lag of Dependencies in Major Package
      Managers. In 2020 27th Asia-Pacific Software Engineering Conference (APSEC). 228-237. doi:10.1109/APSEC51365.2020.
      00031
[51] The UNIX System Group. 1990. UNIX System V Release 4. Programmer's Guide: System Services and Application
      Packaging Tools. Prentice-Hall.
[52] Ralf Treinen and Stefano Zacchiroli. 2009. Common Upgradeability Description Format (CUDF) 2.0. The Mancoosi
      project (FP7) 3 (2009). https://www.mancoosi.org/reports/tr3.pdf
[53] G. S. Tseitin. 1970. On the Complexity of Derivation in Propositional Calculus. In Studies in Constructive Mathematics
      and Mathematical Logic, Part II, A. O. Slisenko (Ed.). Steklov Mathematical Institute, Leningrad, 115-125. Translated
      from Russian: Zapiski Nauchnykh Seminarov LOMI 8 (1968), pp. 234-259.
[54] Chris Tucker, David Shuffelton, Ranjit Jhala, and Sorin Lerner. 2007. Opium: Optimal package install/uninstall manager.
      In 29th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE'07). IEEE, ACM, Minneapolis, MN, USA, 178-188.
[55] Natalie Weizenbaum. 2018. PubGrub: Next-Generation Version Solving. https://nex3.medium.com/pubgrub-
      2fb6470504f
[56] Lyuye Zhang, Chengwei Liu, Sen Chen, Zhengzi Xu, Lingling Fan, Lida Zhao, Yiran Zhang, and Yang Liu. 2023.
      Mitigating Persistence of Open-Source Vulnerabilities in Maven Ecosystem. In 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International
      Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). ACM/IEEE, 191-203. doi:10.1109/ASE56229.2023.00058

A A Short History of Package Managers

The original Unix and pre-Unix operating systems had no concept of automated package manage-

ment; the operating system was distributed with libraries and utilities, and third-party software had
to be built and installed manually. System V Release 4.0 in 1988 included the `packaging tool' pkgadd
and related commands to automate the process of installing packages onto the system from a source

such as a tape, CD-ROM, or networked filesystem, as well as updating and removing them [51].

It verified that dependees were installed, but did not automatically select and install compatible

versions. Other commercial Unix vendors created similar systems in the following years, as well as
early Linux (1991) distributions with Slackware's pkgtool (1993), Debian's dpkg (1994), and Red
Package Managers Ó la Carte  -

Hat's rpm (1995). FreeBSD's Ports (1994) introduced automatic dependee installation, relying on
regular expressions on package names to ensure application binary interface (ABI) compatibility.

   Early programming-language package managers emerged in the form of archive networks for
distributing software over the Internet with the Comprehensive TEX Archive Network (CTAN) in
1992 [32], the Comprehensive Perl Archive Network (CPAN) in 1995 [1], and the Comprehensive R
Archive Network (CRAN) in 1997 [33]. These early repositories provided centralised distribution and
discoverability of packages. The Perl module CPAN.pm and CRAN's install.packages() allowed
for the automatic installation of dependees, but always selected the latest indexed version of each,
performing no version solving. CTAN had no native automated installer; package management
was later provided by TeX Live's tlmgr (2008), which likewise installed only the latest versions,
though TeX Live mitigated incoherence by distributing packages as a curated annual snapshot
rather than a continuously updated live index.

   Debian's Advanced Packaging Tool (APT) (1998), building atop the existing dpkg, resolved
compatible versions of dependencies based on version constraints and automatically installed them.
Red Hat's Yellowdog Updater Modified (YUM) (2002) brought similar capabilities to RPM-based
distributions building on rpm, later superseded by Dandified YUM (DNF) (2012). Dependency
resolution in these systems was shown to be NP-complete by Di Cosmo in 2005 [26]. Slackware is a
notable exception to the norm in package management dependency resolution; official mechanisms
do not provide any support for dependency tracking, instead relying on the user to manually install
dependees of a package.

   By the mid-2000s, automatic dependency resolution with version constraints became standard
practice. Package managers began to be built as monolithic systems expected of any new operating
system or programming language. This evolutionary pattern extends beyond operating systems
and programming languages: plugin ecosystems for web browsers, text editors, and applications
have similarly progressed through centralised archives, automatic installation, and dependency
resolution. As these package managers have developed, the semantics of their dependencies have
diverged, each introducing functionality to address their ecosystem's specific needs.

B Theorem 3.1.4: DependencyResolution Complexity

   Proof. We establish both membership and hardness:
   Membership in NP: A candidate resolution  can be verified in polynomial time by checking:

    (1) Root inclusion (Definition 3.1.3.a):    in  (| |) time.
    (2) Dependency closure (Definition 3.1.3.b): all dependencies are satisfied in  (| | Ę ||) time.
    (3) Version uniqueness (Definition 3.1.3.c): version uniqueness in  (| |2) time.

   NP-Hardness: We give a polynomial-time reduction from 3-SAT, which is well-known to be
NP-complete [22]. For any 3-CNF formula with  variables and  clauses:

    (1)  = (, )  
    (2) For each variable  :   {(, ), (, )}
    (3) For each clause   = 1  2  3:

          (a) ( , 1), ( , 2), ( , 3)  
          (b) (, )( , {1, 2, 3})
          (c)    {1, 2, 3}. ( ,  )(var( ), {pol( )}) where var() extracts the variable of a literal

              and pol() is  for positive literals,  for negative.

The construction runs in  ( + ) time. We prove the equivalence:
-                                                                                 Gibb et al.

   () Given a satisfying assignment  for the formula, for each clause   = 1  2  3, let
          = min{  {1, 2, 3} |  ( ) = }.

                    = { }  {( ,  ) | 1    }  {(,  ( )) | 1    }

         satisfies all dependencies by construction and maintains version uniqueness.

   () Any resolution   S(,  ) induces a satisfying assignment  ( ) =  where (, )  , as
         each clause package   requires at least one of its literals to be satisfied.

Since we have shown DependencyResolution  NP and DependencyResolution is NP-hard we

conclude that DependencyResolution is NP-complete.                                       

C SAT-Based Dependency Resolution

Modern package managers [52] often employ SAT-based resolution to solve dependency problems.
We reduce DependencyResolution to SAT through the following encoding.

   Definition C.1 (Package Calculus Reduction to SAT). Given repository , dependency relation
, and root  , we define a reduction to the SAT instance  as:

    (a) Variables: X = { |   } where  denotes inclusion of package .
    (b) Clauses:

          := ( )     where:
          (i) Dependency Closure:

                    :=             ¼   (,)

                             (, )        

   (ii) Version Uniqueness:

                    :=                  (¼ (,)  ¼ (, ) )

                             (,),(, ) 
                                   

             Note that for a package name    with  = |{ | (, )  }| versions, this adds  (2)
             clauses, but a SAT solver with an at-most-one primitive can reduce this to  () [41].

   Theorem C.2 (Soundness). For any assignment  : X  {, } that satisfies , the set

                              = {   |  () = }

is in S(,  ).
   Theorem C.3 (Completeness). For any valid resolution   S(,  ), the assignment

                              ( ) =     

satisfies .

   Example C.4. Consider the dependencies from Figure 1. The SAT encoding produces  as:
                             (¼  1)  (¼1  1)  (¼1  1)
                                (¼1  1  2)  (¼1  2  3)
                           (¼1  ¼2)  (¼1  ¼3)  (¼2  ¼3)

   Definition C.5 (Ordered SAT Reduction). Given the Package Calculus SAT reduction (Defini-
tion C.1), we refine the dependency implication clauses using version ordering ,

    :=             ¼   (,1)  Ę Ę Ę   (, ) where {1, . . . ,  } = , 1  Ę Ę Ę  

             (, )
Package Managers Ó la Carte  -

This encoding ensures that in each dependency clause, higher versions appear first. SAT solvers
prioritising leftmost literals will preferentially assign true to earlier (higher-version) literals. The
ordering transforms version preference into a search heuristic without altering satisfiability.
-                                                                                                                                      Gibb et al.

D Additional Figures

                                                                                                                                   C1

                                        ((B, {2})  (C, {1}))  ((B, {1})  ¼(C, {1})) 0        B2

                                    A1  ((B, {2})  (C, {1}))  ((B, {1})  ¼(C, {1})) 1        B1

   # A-1.ebuild                                                                  (C, {1}) 0
   DEPEND="|| (                                                                  (C, {1}) 1
                                            (b) Hypergraph of reduction.
      ( =B-2 =C-1 )
      ( =B-1 !!C )
   )"

   (a) Portage syntax.

   Fig. D.1. Reduction of (, 1) (((, {2})  (, {1}))  ((, {1})  ¼(, {1}))) to the core calculus.

   Package: A                                            B1                      (, 1)( , 1)
   Version: 1                                                                    (, 1)( , 1)
   Depends: V              A1           V1   C1                                  (, 1) ( , {1})

   Package: B                           (b) Hypergraph.                  (d) Virtual Package Calculus.
   Version: 1
   Provides: V                          (A, 1), V  B, 1      B1       (, 1)((, 1),  , {, 1, , 1})
                                                                      ((, 1),  , , 1)(, {1})
   Package: C          A1                                             ((, 1),  , , 1)(, {1})
   Version: 1
   Provides: V                          (A, 1), V  C, 1      C1                   (e) Reduction.

   (a) Debian syntax.      (c) Hypergraph of reduction.

                       Fig. D.2. Virtual Package Calculus reduced to the core calculus.

   (, 1, 1)(, 1, {1})                   (, 1, , , 1)(, , 1, {1})             (, , 1, 1)(, 1, {1})
   (, 1, 1)(, 1, {1})                   (, 1, , , 2)(, , 2, {2})             (, , 2, 2)(, 2, {2})
   (, 1, 1)(, 1, , , {1, 2})            (, 1, , , 2)(, , 2, {2})             (, , 2, 2)(, 2, {2})
   (, 1, 1)(, 1, , , {2, 3})            (, 1, , , 3)(, , 3, {3})             (, , 3, 3)(, 3, {3})

          B, 1 1                        (a) Reduction to the core calculus.                         C, 1 1

                                                          A, 1 1

   B, 1, D,  2             D, , 2 2         D, 3 3           D, , 3 3         C, 1, D,  3
   B, 1, D,  1             D, , 1 1         D, 2 2           D, , 2 2         C, 1, D,  2
                                            D, 1 1

                                        (b) Hypergraph of reduction.

                       Fig. D.3. Reduction of Figure 9 to the core calculus.
